Changes to improve downstream use of TPLs (#2467)
kokkos/kokkos: DEVELOPER.md

![Kokkos](https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/10199860?s=200&v=4)

# Developing Kokkos

> This document contains build instructions for developers.

Author: Sure, that probably makes more sense to put it into a cmake folder. Changed to say "build *system* instructions"

![Kokkos](https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/10199860?s=200&v=4)

# Developing Kokkos

This document contains build instructions for developers.
For build system details for users, refer to the [build instructions](BUILD.md).

## Build System

Kokkos uses CMake to configure, build, and install.
Rather than being a completely straightforward use of modern CMake,
Kokkos has several extra complications, primarily due to:
* Kokkos must support linking to an installed version or in-tree builds as a subdirectory of a larger project.
* Kokkos must configure a special compiler `nvcc_wrapper` that allows `nvcc` to accept all C++ flags (which `nvcc` currently does not).
* Kokkos must work as a part of TriBITS, a CMake library providing a particular build idiom for Trilinos.
* Kokkos has many pre-existing users. We need to be careful about breaking previous versions or generating meaningful error messags if we do break backwards compatibility.

> If you are looking at the build system code... pulling your hair out... wondering why on Earth we did something that looks so silly and obtuse... the answer is technical debt. Everything in the build system was done for a reason, trying to adhere as closely as possible to modern CMake best practices while meeting all customer requirements.

Author: Unprofessional is a bit extreme. But, sure, I can make it less tongue-in-cheek.

> If you are looking at the build system code... pulling your hair out... wondering why on Earth we did something that looks so silly and obtuse... the answer is technical debt. Everything in the build system was done for a reason, trying to adhere as closely as possible to modern CMake best practices while meeting all customer requirements.

Reviewer: I rather liked the wording, and think the rewording is a little terse (we're not saying "hey you idiots, nothing is wrong here, everything in the build system was done for a reason", but it kinda sounds like we are?)

Something to the effect of 

```
This build system is a compromise between the requirements of our customers who need to work with older versions of CMake and the best practices of modern CMake.
```

Might be a good way to go

> If you are looking at the build system code... pulling your hair out... wondering why on Earth we did something that looks so silly and obtuse... the answer is technical debt. Everything in the build system was done for a reason, trying to adhere as closely as possible to modern CMake best practices while meeting all customer requirements.

Reviewer: Sorry, the phrase "Everything here was done for a reason" is one of those things that bothers me probably more than it should, but it always makes me wonder "are... are there parts of Kokkos that weren't done for any reason?"

Please don't answer that one ;)

### Modern CMake Philosophy

Modern CMake relies on understanding the principle of *building* and *using* a code project.
What preprocessor, compiler, and linker flags do I need to *build* my project?
What flags does a downstream project that links to me need to *use* my project?
In CMake terms, flags that are only needed for building are `PRIVATE`.
Only Kokkos needs these flags, not a package that depends on Kokkos.
Flags that must be used in a downstream project are `PUBLIC`.
Kokkos must tell other projects to use them.

> In Kokkos, almost everything is a public flag since Kokkos is driven by headers and Kokkos is in charge of optimizing your code - performance portability!

Author: Done.

> Include paths, C++ standard flags, architecture-specific optimizations, or OpenMP and CUDA flags are all example of flags that Kokkos configures and adds to your project.

Author: Done.

Modern CMake now automatically propagates flags through the `target_link_libraries` command.
Suppose you have a library `stencil` that needs to build with Kokkos.

> Consider the following CMake:

Author: Done.

Note that all of these use `PUBLIC`! Almost every Kokkos flag is not private to Kokkos, but must also be used by downstream projects.

### Compiler Features and Compiler Options
Compiler options are flags like `-fopenmp` that do not need to be "resolved." 
The flag is either on or off.
Compiler features are more fine-grained and require conflicting requests to be resolved.
Suppose I have
````
add_library(A a.cpp)
target_compile_features(A PUBLIC cxx_std_11)
````
then another target
````
add_library(B b.cpp)
target_compile_features(B PUBLIC cxx_std_14)
target_link_libraries(A B)
````
I have requested two diferent features.
CMake understands the requests and knows that `cxx_std_11` is a subset of `cxx_std_14`.
CMake then picks C++14 for library `B`.
CMake would not have been able to do feature resolution if we had directly done:
````
target_compile_options(A PUBLIC -std=c++11)
````

### Adding Kokkos Options
After configuring for the first time,
CMake creates a cache of configure variables in `CMakeCache.txt`.
Reconfiguring in the folder "restarts" from those variables.
All flags passed as `-DKokkos_SOME_OPTION=X` to `cmake` become variables in the cache.

> All Kokkos options begin with camel case `Kokkos` followed by an upper case option name.

Author: Done.

Sometimes you may want to add `#define Kokkos_X` macros to the config header.
This is straightforward with CMake.
Suppose you want to define an optional macro `KOKKOS_SUPER_SCIENCE`.
Simply go into `KokkosCore_config.h.in` and add
````
#cmakedefine KOKKOS_SUPER_SCIENCE
````
I can either add
````
KOKKOS_OPTION(SUPER_SCIENCE ON "Whether to do some super science")
````
to directly set the variable as a command-line `-D` option.
Alternatively, based on other logic, I could add to a `CMakeLists.txt`
````
SET(KOKKOS_SUPER_SCIENCE ON)
````
If not set as a command-line option (cache variable), you must make sure the variable is visible in the top-level scope.
If set in a function, you would need:
````
SET(KOKKOS_SUPER_SCIENCE ON PARENT_SCOPE)
````

### Third-Party Libraries
In much the same way that compiler flags transitively propagate to dependent projects,
modern CMake allows us to propagate dependent libraries.
If Kokkos depends on, e.g. `hwloc` the downstream project will also need to link `hwloc`.
There are three stages in adding a new third-party library (TPL):
* Finding: find the desired library on the system and verify the installation is correct

> * Importing: create a CMake target (if not already CMake) that is compatible with `target_link_libraries`

Author: I didn't exactly make this change, but hopefully the new text is clearer.

#### Finding TPLs

If finding a TPL that is not a modern CMake project, refer to the `FindHWLOC.cmake` file in `cmake/Modules` for an example.
You will ususally need to verify expected headers with `find_path`
````
find_path(TPL_INCLUDE_DIR mytpl.h PATHS "${KOKKOS_MYTPL_DIR}/include")
````
This insures that the library header is in the expected include directory and defines the variable `TPL_INCLUDE_DIR` with a valid path if successful.
Similarly, you can verify a library
````
find_library(TPL_LIBRARY mytpl PATHS "${KOKKOS_MYTPL_DIR/lib")
````
that then defines the variable `TPL_LIBRARY` with a valid path if successful.
CMake provides a utility for checking if the `find_path` and `find_library` calls were successful that emulates the behavior of `find_package` for a CMake target.
````
include(FindPackageHandleStandardArgs)
find_package_handle_standard_args(MYTPL DEFAULT_MSG
                                  MYTPL_INCLUDE_DIR MYTPL_LIBRARY)
````
If the find failed, CMake will print standard error messages explaining the failure.

#### Importing TPLs

> The library must now be made into a CMake target that we can link against. 

Author: Changed to be less verbose.

##### KOKKOS_IMPORT_TPL
This function can be invoked as, e.g.
````
KOKKOS_IMPORT_TPL(HWLOC)
````
This function checks if the TPL was enabled by a `-DKokkos_ENABLE_HWLOC=On` flag.
If so, it calls `find_package(TPLHWLOC)`.
This invokes the file `FindTPLHWLOC.cmake` which should be contained in the `cmake/Modules` folder.
If successful, another function `KOKKOS_EXPORT_CMAKE_TPL` gets invoked.
This automatically adds all the necessary import commands to `KokkosConfig.cmake`.

##### KOKKOS_FIND_IMPORTED
Inside a `FindTPLX.cmake` file, the simplest way to import a library is to call, e.g.
````
KOKKOS_FIND_IMPORTED(HWLOC LIBRARY hwloc HEADER hwloc.h)
````
This finds the location of the library and header and creates an imported target `Kokkos::HWLOC`
that can be linked against.
The library/header find can be guided with `-DHWLOC_ROOT=` or `-DKokkos_HWLOC_DIR=` during CMake configure.
These both specify the install prefix.

##### KOKKOS_LINK_TPL
This function checks if the TPL has been enabled.
If so, it links a given library against the imported (or interface) TPL target.

##### KOKKOS_CREATE_IMPORTED_TPL
This helper function is best understood by reading the actual code.

> This function takes arguments specifying the properties and creates the actual TPL target.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It takes arguments specifying the properties and creates the actual TPL target.
```

This tells the project to either create the target as an imported target or interface target, as discussed above.

##### KOKKOS_EXPORT_CMAKE_TPL
Even if the TPL just loads a valid CMake target, we still must "export" it into the config file.
When Kokkos is loaded by a downstream project, this TPL must be loaded.
Calling this function simply appends text recording the location where the TPL was found
and adding a `find_dependency(...)` call that will reload the CMake target.

### The Great TriBITS Compromise

TriBITS was a masterpiece of CMake version 2 before the modern CMake idioms of building and using.
TriBITS greatly limited verbosity of CMake files, handled complicated dependency trees between packages, and handled automatically setting up include and linker paths for dependent libraries.

Kokkos is now used by numerous projects that don't (and won't) depend on TriBITS for their build systems.
Kokkos has to work outside of TriBITS and provide a standard CMake 3+ build system.
At the same time, Kokkos is used by numerous projects that depend on TriBITS and don't (and won't) switch to a standard CMake 3+ build system.

Nevertheless, Kokkos must satisfy all customers for now.

> Kokkos is implemented as something TriBITS-like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Agreed. Done.

> Instead of calling functions `TRIBITS_X(...)` it calls a function `KOKKOS_X(...)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is achieved by providing an abstraction layer for `TriBITS` functions:
```

Author: Reworded - thought not exactly as suggested.
